Create gleam-for-go-users guide (#321)
gleam-lang/website: cheatsheets/gleam-for-go-users.md

---
layout: page
title: Gleam for Go users
subtitle: Hello Gophers!
---

- [Comments](#comments)
- [Variables](#variables)
  - [Match operator](#match-operator)
  - [Variables type annotations](#variables-type-annotations)
- [Functions](#functions)
  - [Exporting functions](#exporting-functions)
  - [Function type annotations](#function-type-annotations)
  - [Referencing functions](#referencing-functions)
  - [Labelled arguments](#labelled-arguments)
- [Operators](#operators)
- [Constants](#constants)
- [Blocks](#blocks)
- [Data types](#data-types)
  - [Strings](#strings)
  - [Tuples](#tuples)
  - [Lists](#lists)
  - [Maps](#maps)
  - [Numbers](#numbers)
- [Flow control](#flow-control)
  - [Case](#case)
  - [Piping](#piping)
  - [Error Handling](#error-handling)
- [Type aliases](#type-aliases)
- [Custom types](#custom-types)
  - [Records](#records)
  - [Unions](#unions) IN PROGRESS
  - [Opaque custom types](#opaque-custom-types) IN PROGRESS
- [Modules](#modules) IN PROGRESS
  - [Imports](#imports) IN PROGRESS
  - [Named imports](#named-imports) IN PROGRESS
  - [Unqualified imports](#unqualified-imports) IN PROGRESS

> - [Architecture](#architecture) IN PROGRESS

Reviewer: Are these actually "in progress"? Or should this note be removed?

Imports are relative to the app `src` folder.

Modules in the same directory will need to reference the entire path from `src`
for the target module, even if the target module is in the same folder.

Inside module `src/nasa/moon_base.gleam`:

```gleam
// imports module src/nasa/rocket_ship.gleam
import nasa/rocket_ship

pub fn explore_space() {
  rocket_ship.launch()
}
```

### Named imports

#### Go

Go allows you to alias a package import

```go
import (
	other "github.com/example/example-go-project/somepkg"
)

func main() {
	other.SomeFunc()
}
```

#### Gleam

Gleam has as similar feature:

```gleam
import unix/cat
import animal/cat as kitty
// cat and kitty are available
```

This may be useful to differentiate between multiple modules that would have the same default name when imported.

### Unqualified imports

#### Go

Go does not support unqualified imports

#### Gleam

```gleam
import animal/cat.{
  Cat,
  stroke
}

pub fn main() {
  let kitty = Cat(name: "Nubi")
  stroke(kitty)
}
```

Importing common types such as `gleam/order.{Lt, Eq, Gt}` or
`gleam/option.{Some,None}` can be very helpful.

## Architecture

To iterate a few foundational differences (Go VS Gleam):

> 1. Programming model: imperative VS functional immutable

Reviewer: A common Go-ism is something like:

- Declare struct
- Declare constructor
- Declare methods on struct

It would be handy to see how you'd achieve this in Gleam. 

I know that for Gleam some people recommend a "context" struct that you pass in as the first argument which contains what would normally be Go struct fields: Database connections, loggers, HTTP clients etc.

4. Error handling: error value VS result type .  Both do have some form of runtime panic or exception which can be recovered from.
5. Distribution: Single static binaries VS BEAM virtual machine bytecode (or Javascript code).

### Programming model

- Go is an imperative programming language, with only very limited object-oriented facilities 
  provided. Gleam offers only functional code style, though it can appear
  imperative and reads easily thanks to pipes.
- In Gleam, data structures are never mutated but always updated into new
  structures. This allows processes that fail to simply restart as there are no
  mutated objects that can be in an invalid state and take the whole
  application down (such as in languages like Ruby or Go).
- Gleam offers syntax to make it easy to extract data out of custom types and
  update data into new copies of custom types without ever mutating variables.
  Go sometimes directly mutates references of simple values such as when using
  pointers or global variables, though this is very much not idiomatic.
- Gleam allows to rebind variables freely to make it easy to update data
  structures by making a copy and binding it to the existing variable.

> - Go features a massive, powerful standard library centered around simple interfaces.

Reviewer: These aren't really dot points, but paragraphs.

I would:

- Remove the dot points
- Move the last paragraph to the second paragraph so the Go and Gleam paragraphs are kept together

  - [Referencing functions](#referencing-functions)
  - [Labelled arguments](#labelled-arguments)
- [Operators](#operators)
- [Constants](#constants)
- [Blocks](#blocks)
- [Data types](#data-types)
  - [Strings](#strings)
  - [Tuples](#tuples)
  - [Lists](#lists)
  - [Maps](#maps)
  - [Numbers](#numbers)
- [Flow control](#flow-control)
  - [Case](#case)
  - [Piping](#piping)
  - [Error Handling](#error-handling)
- [Type aliases](#type-aliases)
- [Custom types](#custom-types)
  - [Records](#records)
  - [Unions](#unions) IN PROGRESS
  - [Opaque custom types](#opaque-custom-types) IN PROGRESS
- [Modules](#modules) IN PROGRESS
  - [Imports](#imports) IN PROGRESS
  - [Named imports](#named-imports) IN PROGRESS
  - [Unqualified imports](#unqualified-imports) IN PROGRESS
- [Architecture](#architecture) IN PROGRESS

## Comments

### Go

In Go, comments are written with a `//` prefix.

```Go
// Hello, Joe!
```

Multi line comments may be written like so:

```Go
/*
 * Hello, Joe!
 */
```

In Go, top level declarations can be annotated with a comment directly above it to create documentation for that symbol.

```Go
// This is a special interface

> type Foo interface {}

Reviewer 2: Could you swap "foobar" for something that isn't a horrors-of-war reference please 🙏

// Config struct
type Config Struct {}

// This will quux a string
func Quux(str string) string {
  return str
}
```

Any of these documentation comments on exported members will be included in your package documentation

### Gleam

In Gleam, comments are written with a `//` prefix.

```gleam
// Hello, Joe!
```

Comments starting with `///` are used to document the following function,
constant, or type definition. Comments starting with `////` are used to
document the current module.

```gleam
//// This module is very important.

/// The answer to life, the universe, and everything.
const answer: Int = 42

/// A main function
fn main() {}

/// A Dog type
type Dog {
  Dog(name: String, cuteness: Int)
}
```

`//` comments are not used while generating documentation files, while
`////` and `///` will appear in them.

## Variables

You can rebind variables in both languages.

### Go

In Go you specify values by:
- Specifically declare the variable with the `var` keyboard and a name and then either just the type, or an optional type and value
- a variable name (or comma separated list of names), the `:=` operator and then an expression

```Go
size := 50
size := size + 100

> size = 1

Reviewer 3: The second line is not valid following the first. You get an `no new variables on left side of :=` error. 

https://go.dev/play/p/UGW6HduxifQ

// a = 1
// `_` matches 2 and is discarded

let assert [] = [1] // runtime error
let assert [y] = "Hello" // compile error, type mismatch
```

Asserts should be used with caution.

### Variables type annotations

#### Go

In Go type annotations are generally required in most places.  The exception is when variables or constants are initialized with a value. Multiple consecutive struct fields or function arguments of the same time can combined their type annotation. 

```Go
type SomethingElse struct {
  field string
  otherField int
  x, y float64
}

func multipleArgsOfSameType(str string, x, y float64) {}
```

#### Gleam

In Gleam type annotations can optionally be given when binding variables.

```gleam
let some_list: List(Int) = [1, 2, 3]
let some_string: String = "A string"
```

Gleam will check the type annotation to ensure that it matches the type of the
assigned value. It does not need annotations to type check your code, but you
may find them useful for documentation purposes.

## Functions

### Go

In Go, you can define functions with the `func` keyword. The `return`
keyword is required if the function has a return value, and optional otherwise.

```Go

> func hello(name string) string {
>   if name == 'Joe' {
>     return 'Welcome back, Joe!'
>   }
>   return "Hello $name"
> }

Reviewer 3: You need double quotes for strings. Single quotes are runes (characters). Go doesn't have interpolation inside of strings. 

```suggestion
func hello(name string) string {
	if name == "Joe" {
		return "Welcome back, Joe!"
	}
	return fmt.Sprintf("Hello %s", name)
}
```

Author: Done

func noop() {
  // No return value
}
```

Anonymous functions can also be defined and be bound to variables.

```Go

> x := 2
> GoAnonFn := func(y) { return x * y } // Captures x
> GoAnonFn(2, 3) // 6

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
x := 2
GoAnonFn := func(y int) int { return x * y } // Captures x
GoAnonFn(3) // 6
```

```

### Gleam

Gleam's functions are declared like so:

```gleam
fn sum(x, y) {
  x + y
}
```

Gleam's anonymous functions have the same basic syntax.

```gleam
let mul = fn(x, y) { x * y }
mul(1, 2)
```

A difference between Go's and Gleam's anonymous functions is that in Go they
create a new local scope but inherit the surrounding scope, allowing you to mutate variables in that scope. In Gleam you can shadow local variables within anonymous functions but you cannot influence the variable bindings in the outer scope.  In Go you can actually change the values in the outer scope, even if that scope has been returned.

The only difference between module functions and anonymous functions in Gleam
is that module functions heads may also feature argument labels, like so:

```gleam
// In some module.gleam
pub fn distance(from x: Int, to y: Int) : Int {
  abs(x) - abs(y) |> abs()
}
// In some other function
distance(from: 1, to: -2) // 3
```

### Exporting functions

#### Go

In Go, functions are exported if their name is capitalized, and private to the package otherwise.

```Go

> func PublicHello(name string) string {  // Exported
>   if name == 'Joe' {
>     return 'Welcome back, Joe!'
>   }
>   return "Hello $name"
> }
> 
> func privateHello(name string) string { // Package private
>   if name == 'Joe' {
>     return 'Welcome back, Joe!'
>   }
>   return "Hello $name"
> }

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
func PublicHello(name string) string {  // Exported
  if name == "Joe" {
    return "Welcome back, Joe!"
  }
  return fmt.Sprintf("Hello %s", name)
}

func privateHello(name string) string { // Package private
  if name == "Joe" {
    return "Welcome back, Joe!"
  }
  return fmt.Sprintf("Hello %s", name)
}
```

Author: Fixed

    2
  }
  // Braces are used to change precedence of arithmetic operators
  let y = x * {x + 10}
  y
}
```

Unlike in Go, in Gleam function blocks are always expressions, so are `case`
blocks or arithmetic sub groups. Because they are expressions they always
return a value.

For Gleam the last value in a block's expression is always the value being
returned from an expression.

## Data types

### Strings

In Go strings are slices (dynamically sized arrays) of bytes. Those bytes are
arbitrary, and are not required to contain Unicode or any other string encoding.
Go's standard library however has extensive support for string operations. Strings
can be built efficiently with a `StringBuilder` type from the `strings` package in
the standard library.  Interpolation can be accomplished using `Sprintf` and other
similar functions found in `fmt` package amongst others in the standard library.
This uses C `strfmt` style format strings that are statically checked at compile time.

In Gleam all strings are unicode binaries. Gleam however offers a `StringBuilder` type via its standard
library which may be more performant than joining strings in some scenarios.

#### Go

```Go

> what := "world"
> "Hellø, world!"
> fmt.Sprintf("Hellø, %d!", what);

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
what := "world"
// "Hellø, world!"
fmt.Printf("Hellø, %v!", what)
```

pub fn main() {
  assert Ok(point) = Point.spawn(1, 2)
  point
}
```

## Modules

Modules in Gleam are the principal unit of code organization. Each
Gleam file is a Module.  A module exports a number of symbols and
can import symbols from other modules.

### Go

In Go, the term _modules_ refers to a set of packages that share
common dependencies and are stored alongside one another.  A _package_
in Go is closer to the Gleam concept of _modules_.  The biggest difference
is that a _package_ in Go can be spread across many files in one directory.

In `mymod/something/something.go`:
```Go
// Anything declared in the something directory will be inside the <path-to-mymod>/something package
package something

// This function is available for import by other packages
func Identity(x any) {
  return x;
}

func privateFunc() {}
```

In `mymod/something/other.go`:
```Go
// Anything declared in the something directory will be inside the <path-to-mymod>/something package
package something

func otherFunc(x any) {
  privateFunc() // Can be used here
  return x;
}

```

We can now call Identity from the main package in your binary.

```Go
package main

import (
  "fmt"

> m

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

Author: I don't understand?

Reviewer 3: The m is causing a syntax error

type Dog {
  Dog(name: String, cuteness: Int)
}
```

`//` comments are not used while generating documentation files, while
`////` and `///` will appear in them.

## Variables

You can rebind variables in both languages.

### Go

In Go you specify values by:
- Specifically declare the variable with the `var` keyboard and a name and then either just the type, or an optional type and value
- a variable name (or comma separated list of names), the `:=` operator and then an expression

```Go
size := 50
size := size + 100
size = 1
```

### Gleam

Gleam has the `let` keyword before its variable names.

```gleam
let size = 50
let size = size + 100
let size = 1
```

### Match operator

#### Go

Go has no real support for any sort of pattern matching or destructuring.  It does support multiple return values.  These are assigned to
separated variable names separated by commas

```Go
a, b := func() (int, int) { return 1, 2 }();
// a == 1
// b == 2
```

#### Gleam

In Gleam, `let` and `=` can be used for pattern matching, but you'll get
compile errors if there's a type mismatch, and a runtime error if there's
a value mismatch. For assertions, the equivalent `let assert` keyword is

> preferred.

Reviewer 4: The compiler won't let you match a `let` pattern if it doesn't match all possible cases. `let assert` will cause a runtime error if the pattern doesn't match

a specific type to be inferred.

## Functions

### Go

In Go, you can define functions with the `func` keyword. The `return`
keyword is required if the function has a return value, and optional otherwise.

```Go
func hello(name string) string {
  if name == 'Joe' {
    return 'Welcome back, Joe!'
  }
  return "Hello $name"
}

func noop() {
  // No return value
}
```

Anonymous functions can also be defined and be bound to variables.

```Go
x := 2
GoAnonFn := func(y) { return x * y } // Captures x
GoAnonFn(2, 3) // 6
```

### Gleam

Gleam's functions are declared like so:

```gleam
fn sum(x, y) {
  x + y
}
```

Gleam's anonymous functions have the same basic syntax.

```gleam
let mul = fn(x, y) { x * y }
mul(1, 2)
```

A difference between Go's and Gleam's anonymous functions is that in Go they
create a new local scope but inherit the surrounding scope, in Gleam they close 
over the local scope, aka create a copy and inherit all variables in the scope.
This means that in Gleam you can shadow local variables within anonymous functions
but you cannot influence the variable bindings in the outer scope.  In Go you can

> actually change the values in the outer scope, even if that scope has been returned.

Author: Right, SSA just like Erlang/Elixir

```Go
func aFunc() {
  // A block starts here
  if foo {
    // A block here
  } else {
    // A block here
  }
  // Block continues
}
```

### Gleam

In Gleam curly braces, `{` and `}`, are used to group expressions.

```gleam
pub fn main() {
  let x = {
    some_function(1)
    2
  }
  // Braces are used to change precedence of arithmetic operators
  let y = x * {x + 10}
  y
}
```

Unlike in Go, in Gleam function blocks are always expressions, so are `case`
blocks or arithmetic sub groups. Because they are expressions they always
return a value.

For Gleam the last value in a block's expression is always the value being
returned from an expression.

## Data types

### Strings

In Go strings are slices (dynamically sized arrays) of bytes. Those bytes are
arbitrary, and are not required to contain Unicode or any other string encoding.
Go's standard library however has extensive support for string operations. Strings
can be built efficiently with a `StringBuilder` type from the `strings` package in
the standard library.  Interpolation can be accomplished using `Sprintf` and other
similar functions found in `fmt` package amongst others in the standard library.

> This uses C `strfmt` style format strings that are statically checked at compile time.

Author: Shortened it to focus on the important semantics

pwd := myTuple.pwd
fmt.Print(pwd)
fmt.Print(myTuple.pwd)
```

```go
// This is not idiomatic Go!
func returnUserInfo() (string, string, int) {
  return "username", "password", 10
}

func main() {
  _, pwd, _ := returnUserInfo()
  fmt.Print(pwd)
}
```

#### Gleam

```gleam
let my_tuple = #("username", "password", 10)
let #(_, pwd, _) = my_tuple
io.print(pwd) // "password"
// Direct index access
io.print(my_tuple.0) // "username"
```

### Lists

Go and Gleam have very different data structures for representing an ordered
collection of elements of the same type.

#### Go

Go has both arrays - that are statically sized - and slices - that are growable
and dynamically sized. They have a type declared when constructed

```Go
array := [3]int{ 2, 3, 4 }
slice := []int{ 2, 3, 4 }
slice = append(slice, 5, 6) // Adds 5 and 6 to the slice
```

Slices have some unique concerns as regards to references as if you append to
a slice, the underlying array may no longer be in the same memory location as
it was before and some mutative operations can have unexpected behavior for the
unpracticed (or even experienced) Gopher.

#### Gleam

> Gleam has a `cons` operator that works for lists destructuring and

Author: I have no idea where I got that from, will fix

pattern matching. In Gleam lists are immutable so adding and removing elements
from the start of a list is highly efficient.

```gleam
let list = [2, 3, 4]
let list = [1, ..list]
let [1, second_element, ..] = list
[1.0, ..list] // compile error, type mismatch
```

### Maps

> Maps are similar in Go and Gleam, except that they are mutated in Go and

Author: Fixed

var y int = 22
x + y // Will not compile
x + int32(int) // Will compile
```

#### Gleam

```gleam
1 / 2 // 0
1.5 + 10 // Compile time error
```

You can use the gleam standard library's `int` and `float` modules to convert
between floats and integers in various ways including `rounding`, `floor`,
`ceiling` and many more.

## Flow control

### Case

Case is one of the most used control flow in Gleam. It can be seen as a switch
statement on steroids. It provides a terse way to match a value type to an
expression. It is also used to replace `if`/`else` statements.

#### Go

Go features 2 different expressions to achieve similar goals:

- `if`/`else if`/`else`
- `switch`/`case`/`default`

```Go
func httpErrorImpl1(status int) string {
  if status == 400 {
      return "Bad request"
  } else if status == 404 {
      return "Not found"
  } else if status == 418 {
      return "I'm a teapot"
  } else {
    return "Internal Server Error"
  }
}

func httpErrorImpl2(status int) string {
  switch (status) {
    case 400:
      return "Bad request"
    case 404:
      return "Not found"
    case 418:
      return "I'm a teapot"
    default:
      return "Internal Server Error"
  }

> }

Author: Done

  List(#(String, String))
```

## Custom types

### Records

Custom type allows you to define a collection data type with a fixed number of
named fields, and the values in those fields can be of differing types.

#### Go

Go uses structs to define user-defined, record-like types.
Properties are defined as fields and initial values are generally set in
the literal form. Any unset fields during construction are defaulted to
their zero value.

Go does not use constructors, but many Go developers will create one or more
functions to construct a struct in an ergonomic way.

```Go
type Person struct {
  name string
  age int
}

func NewPerson(name string, age int) Person {
    return Person{ name, age } // Short hand literal construction
    // Could also be done with
    // return Person { name: name, age: age }
}

// Inside of a function
person := NewPerson("Joe", 40);
person.name // Joe;
```

#### Gleam

Gleam's custom types can be used as structs. At runtime, they have a tuple
representation and are compatible with Erlang records (or JavaScript objects).

```gleam
type Person {
  Person(name: String, age: Int)
}

let person = Person(name: "Joe", age: 40)
let name = person.name
```

> An important difference to note is there is no Java-style object-orientation in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An important difference to note is there is no object-orientation in
```

In Gleam functions must always take and receive one type. To have a union of
two different types they must be wrapped in a new custom type.

#### Go

Generally the usecase of wanting to use multiple concrete types is solved with
Interfaces.

```Go
type Stringer interface {
	String() string // Types must have a function with this signature defined
}

type StructA struct {
	name string
	age int
}

func (s StructA) String() string {  // This method fulfills the Stringer interface
	return fmt.Sprintf("%s,%d", s.name, s.age)
}

type StructB struct {
	x int
	y int
}

func (s StructB) String() string {  // This method fulfills the Stringer interface
	return fmt.Sprintf("%d,%d", s.x, s.y)
}

func print(str Stringer) {
	fmt.Print(str.String())
}

func main() {
	print(StructA{ "Bob", 47}) // Prints Bob,47
	print(StructB{ 42,0 }) // Prints 42,0
}
```

The only place where Go uses something related to true unions or sum types is in Type Sets,
which are constraints on a Generic.

```go
type Num interface {
	int | float
}
```

Unfortunately, these unions provide little value to the Go Developer due to their
constraints.

#### Gleam

> 

Reviewer: Worth having a sentence here explaining Gleam's approach

Author: Done

```gleam
type IntOrFloat {
  AnInt(Int)
  AFloat(Float)
}

fn int_or_float(X) {
  case X {
    True -> AnInt(1)
    False -> AFloat(1.0)
  }
}
```

### Opaque custom types

In Go, you can choose to not export a type and then they will be considered
opaque to the user of your package.  Just have the type have a lowercase

> identifier.

Reviewer 2: Can you still reference the type from other packages? I thought it would make it private, not opaque

Reviewer: It will be opaque from outside the package, which is the same thing as private? I might be misunderstanding

Author: Sorry, I should clear this up.  To make a type Opaque in Go is having the type public, but all fields and methods being private.  It would then be unusable outside of whatever public functions that work with it are exposed.  The water is muddied by the fact that methods are just functions that have a certain type as the receiver.  But I think not exposing them is closer to the intent of opaque types in that they may flow through code outside the package, but that code should have no idea about the details of the type.

using the intended API.

#### Go

```Go
package mypkg
type myType struct { // Can't be used outside of this package

}

func SomeFunc() myType {}
func OtherFunc(mt myType) bool {}
```

```go
package main

import "someurl.com/mymodule/mypkg"

func main() {
  mt := mypkg.SomeFunc()
  if mypkg.OtherFunc(mt) {
    fmt.Println("I can use the opaque type but can't create it!")
  }
}
```

#### Gleam

```gleam
// In the point.gleam opaque type module:
pub opaque type Point {
  Point(x: Int, y: Int)
}

pub fn spawn(x: Int, y: Int) -> Result(Point, Nil) {
  case x >= 0 && x <= 99 && y >= 0 && y <= 99 {
    True -> Ok(Point(x: x, y: y))
    False -> Error(Nil)
  }
}

// In the main.gleam module
pub fn main() {
  assert Ok(point) = Point.spawn(1, 2)
  point
}
```

## Modules

Modules in Gleam are the principal unit of code organization. Each
Gleam file is a Module.  A module exports a number of symbols and
can import symbols from other modules.

### Go

In Go, the term _modules_ refers to a set of packages that share
common dependencies and are stored alongside one another.  A _package_
in Go is closer to the Gleam concept of _modules_.  The biggest difference

> is that a _package_ in Go can be spread across many files in one directory.

Reviewer: Very helpful comment! This is what tripped me up

for the target module, even if the target module is in the same folder.

Inside module `src/nasa/moon_base.gleam`:

```gleam
// imports module src/nasa/rocket_ship.gleam
import nasa/rocket_ship

pub fn explore_space() {
  rocket_ship.launch()
}
```

### Named imports

#### Go

Go allows you to alias a package import

```go
import (
  other "github.com/example/example-go-project/somepkg"
)

func main() {
  other.SomeFunc()
}
```

#### Gleam

Gleam has as similar feature:

```gleam
import unix/cat
import animal/cat as kitty
// cat and kitty are available
```

This may be useful to differentiate between multiple modules that would have the same default name when imported.

### Unqualified imports

#### Go

Go does not support unqualified imports

#### Gleam

```gleam
import animal/cat.{
  Cat,
  stroke
}

pub fn main() {
  let kitty = Cat(name: "Nubi")
  stroke(kitty)
}
```

Importing common types such as `gleam/order.{Lt, Eq, Gt}` or
`gleam/option.{Some,None}` can be very helpful.

## Architecture

To iterate a few foundational differences:

1. Programming model: imperative VS functional immutable
   programming

> 2. Guarantees: implicit nillability vs explicit nillability

Reviewer: nillability == nullability? Or is it something else

Author: Same. Use nillability here since Go uses nil as opposed to null

3. Runtime model: lightweight coroutines(`goroutines`) VS Erlang/OTP processes

> 4. Error handling: error value (and very few panics) VS result type

Reviewer 2: I think Go and Gleam use panics in a similar way- for fatal unexpected errors. I could be wrong though, my Go is rusty.

Reviewer: In general, panics should never be used in Go (especially in libraries), you'd return wrapped errors to build a manual one-line stack trace and handle it at the top.

Only time I've used panic is because I was developing quickly and planned to replace it all with error returns

Author: That's true, it's rare that you will write a panic, panics will occur, such as when you read from a nil channel

Author: Actually I think @lpil is more or less right, a panic can be recovered and is a way for the application to choose to recover and get back into a working state.  Which is similar to having a process being killed in a supervision tree.

> 5. Distribution: Single static binaries vs Dynamically linked binary that relies on Erlang runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Distribution: Single static binaries vs BEAM virtual machine bytecode
```

  imperative and reads easily thanks to pipes.
- In Gleam, data structures are never mutated but always updated into new
  structures. This allows processes that fail to simply restart as there are no
  mutated objects that can be in an invalid state and take the whole
  application down (such as in languages like Ruby or Go).
- Gleam offers syntax to make it easy to extract data out of custom types and
  update data into new copies of custom types without ever mutating variables.
  Go sometimes directly mutates references of simple values such as when using
  pointers or global variables, though this is very much not idiomatic.
- Gleam allows to rebind variables freely to make it easy to update data
  structures by making a copy and binding it to the existing variable.
- Go features a massive, powerful standard library centered around simple interfaces.
  Everything from string manipulation to the tools to create an http server are included
  out of the box.  It has been tuned for over 15 years for performance and has strong
  guarantees about backwards and forwards compatibility.
- Gleam allows you to opt into a smaller, well polished and consistent standard

>   library.

Reviewer: I'd re-order this so that points starting with "Go" are first and points starting with "Gleam" are second. Right now the ordering is a bit harder to follow because it keeps switching between the two languages

Reviewer: Either that or have subheadings, one for gleam, one for go

### Guarantees and types

- Both Go and Gleam features strong static typing.
- Both Go and Gleam values are not automatically cast.
- Both Go and Gleam's comparison operators are very strict and limited, any other
  comparisons and conversions must happen via function calls or other explicit type
  conversion mechanisms.

> - Go's checks happen at compile time (except for reflection), Gleam uses the compiler

Reviewer 2: This sounds a bit like Gleam does runtime checks while Go do more compile time checks?

  and pattern matching to allow for robust compile time check but does have interop
  with Erlang, a dynamically language that relies on good interfaces written in Gleam
  to provide any type-safety.
- Go has limited type inference, all functions and data structures require explicit types.
  Gleam's type inference allows you to be lazy for almost all type definitions.
  Gleam's type system will always assist you in what types are expected and/or
  conflicting. Gleam's type system will help you discover APIs.

### Runtime model

> - Gleam can run on Erlang/BEAM, on the browser but also Deno or NodeJS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Gleam can run on Erlang or JavaScript runtimes.
```

> - Gleam on Erlang/BEAM allows to processes requests in complete isolation,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Gleam on Erlangallows to processes requests in complete isolation,
```

  unlike Go, where memory sharing is allowed - though communicating through
  channels is recommended.  Channels and Goroutines allow for good isolation
  if used in a disciplined manner.  That being said, Mutexes and other shared
  state mechanisms are included in the standard library.

  The level of isolation means that, if a process crashes then the supervision
  system can restart that process or after a while or amount of tries abort
  repeating restarts on the process with that given input data. This means

>   Erlang/BEAM will yield incredibly robust concurrent systems, even superior

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Erlang can yield incredibly robust concurrent systems, even superior
```

  to what experienced Gophers can accomplish with Goroutines, Channels, and
  recover patterns.
- When executing Gleam code in fact its compiled Erlang or JavaScript is
  executed. So in case there are runtime crashes, the crash log will show

>   Erlang (or browser-console/NodeJS/Deno) debug information. In Gleam

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Erlang or JavaScript debug information. In Gleam
```

  applications runtime errors should almost never happen but they are harder
  to read, in Go applications runtime errors might be more common but the will be
  easier to read.

### Error handling

- Gleam will catch all errors that are expected to happen via the `Result`
  type. There can however be other errors, such as miss-behavior due
  accidental to division by 0, crashes on RAM or storage limits, hardware
  failures, etc. In these cases on the BEAM there are ways to manage these

>   via BEAM's supervision trees.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  via Erlang/OTP's supervision trees.
```
